Annotated: propose better terminology (#1769)
python/typing: docs/spec/qualifiers.rst

Syntax
^^^^^^

``Annotated`` is parameterized with a *base type* and an arbitrary list of

> Python values that represent *metadata* for the type::

Reviewer: The phrase "for the type" is problematic here. It implies that the metadata must apply to the *type*. That hasn't previously been specified, and some existing use cases for `Annotated` treat the metadata as applying to the *symbol*, not the *type*. This phrasing therefore constrains the use cases of `Annotated`. Is this your intent? If so, I think this deserves a much broader discussion before we make such a change.

Author: ```suggestion
Python values that represent *metadata*::
```
I definitely don't intend to narrow the possible use cases for Annotated. Would simply removing "for the type" work?

Reviewer: Yes, I think that works.

Reviewer 2: You could also consider something like

```suggestion
Python values that represent *associated metadata*::
```

which would leave open the possibility that it could be the _type_ that the metadata is associated with, but it could also be the _symbol_ that the metadata is associated with

Author: Thanks, I added "associated" (but outside the italics because the term being introduced is "metadata", not "associated metadata").

    from typing import Annotated

>     Annotated[BaseType, Metadata1, Metadata2, ...]

Reviewer: As I mentioned in discourse, I have misgivings about the term "base type" here. I'd prefer if we simply used the term "type". The problem with "base type" is that it implies that the type is modified by the metadata. First, this isn't the case for static type checkers. Second, metadata doesn't need to (and often doesn't in practice) refer to the type; it can apply to the symbol that the annotation is applied to — or something else completely.

Author: I think it's important for clarity to have some term that specifically refers to what I call the base type. Would using "inner type" address your concern?

Reviewer: I don't think "inner type" is much better than "base type". I think it reads fine without giving it an adjective. `Annotated` allows one to specify a "type" and some metadata that may or may not have anything to do with the type.

Author: I would find it difficult to explain how PEP 746 works without some term specifically for the base type.

Author: Another option: We could call it the "base expression". That actually works better than type because the "base type" may be an annotation expression, not a type expression (e.g., `x: Annotated[Final[int], "some metadata"]` is legal).

Reviewer: Yeah, I think "base expression" works well.

Reviewer: Or "type expression", since this type argument needs to be a valid type expression, whereas the metadata expressions do not.

Author: > since this type argument needs to be a valid type expression

It doesn't; annotation expressions can be wrapped in Annotated[] according to the grammar I wrote. 

However, neither mypy nor pyright handle this the way I'd expect: https://pyright-play.net/?strict=true&code=GYJw9gtgBALgngBwJYDsDmUkQWEMoCCKKYMAhjAKYAmANFAGKpkA2AUGwB4BchxpFGgG0mKVkNQwAuvQBEESuVlSoAXigBGNnF6jxkleq1c1UAEzbTFoA

```
from typing import Annotated, Final

x: Annotated[Final[int], "meta"] = 1
y: Final[int] = 1

x = 2  # no pyright error
y = 2  # pyright error
```

Pyright appears to simply ignore the Final, and mypy gives an error saying Final needs to be the outermost qualifier (https://mypy-play.net/?mypy=latest&python=3.12&gist=1069ad21b4b074710886b35744c9deaf). This is another discrepancy we'll have to resolve eventually.

Reviewer 2: I like "inner type" or "wrapped type" for this. I agree with Eric in not particularly liking "base type"

Reviewer: > annotation expressions can be wrapped in Annotated[] according to the grammar I wrote

Oh, I didn't catch that. I think that's a mistake. The first argument to `Annotated` must be a valid type. This is spelled out clearly later in the spec. The expression `Final[int]` is not a valid type, so it doesn't make sense for it to be used in `Annotated`. I think should be fixed this in the grammar, and type checkers should enforce this rule.

Reviewer 3: I think the part of the spec that says that the first argument to `Annotated` must be a valid type is out-of-date. It looks like that restriction was relaxed in [this issue](https://bugs.python.org/issue46491). Elsewhere, the spec says that `Final` may be wrapped by `Annotated` (near the bottom of [this section](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/qualifiers.html#semantics-and-examples)) and that `Required`, `NotRequired`, and `Annotated` can appear in any nesting order ([here](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#interaction-with-annotated)).

Reviewer: Ah yes, I forgot about those provisions elsewhere in the spec. So yes, it sounds like we have an inconsistency here. I think it would be cleaner to allow only type expressions as the first type argument to `Annotated`, but I guess that ship has sailed, and it would be disruptive to undo that decision.

Reviewer: I've updated pyright to honor `Final` when it's nested in `Annotated`: https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/issues/8097.

Here are the specific details of the syntax:

* The base type (the first argument to ``Annotated``) must be a valid type

    * If ``Annotated`` is used in a place where arbitrary
      :term:`annotation expressions <annotation expression>` are allowed,
      the base type may also be an annotation expression
    * Otherwise, the base type must be a valid :term:`type expression`.

* Multiple metadata objects are supported (``Annotated`` supports variadic
  arguments)::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")]

* There must be at least one metadata object (``Annotated[int]`` is not valid)

> * The order of the metadata is preserved and matters for equality

Reviewer 2: Could refer to these as metadata "elements" rather than "objects"

```suggestion
* The order of the metadata elements is preserved and matters for equality
```

Author: I think in this line it's fine to just say "The order of the metadata".

Reviewer 2: I don't mind this line too much, but I was intending to also make a broader point -- you use "metadata objects" quite a bit; I personally prefer "metadata elements" as a term.

Author: Edited to say "elements"

Syntax
^^^^^^

``Annotated`` is parameterized with a *base expression* and an arbitrary list of
Python values that represent associated *metadata*::

    from typing import Annotated

    Annotated[BaseExpr, Metadata1, Metadata2, ...]

Here are the specific details of the syntax:

* The base expression (the first argument to ``Annotated``) must be valid
  in the context where it is being used:

    * If ``Annotated`` is used in a place where arbitrary
      :term:`annotation expressions <annotation expression>` are allowed,

>       the base type may also be an annotation expression

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      the base expression may also be an annotation expression
```

>     * Otherwise, the base type must be a valid :term:`type expression`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * Otherwise, the base expression must be a valid :term:`type expression`.
```

Syntax
^^^^^^

> ``Annotated`` is parameterized with a *base expression* and an arbitrary list of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``Annotated`` is parameterized with a *base expression* and an arbitrary number of
```

Though "arbitrary" isn't quite right either, in fact, since there has to be at least one metadata element. (But that's stated explicitly lower down, so maybe it's okay to have slightly imprecise language here.)

Anyway, you don't have to deal with these nits now if you don't want to, since the issues pre-exist this PR

Author: How is this new wording? 

> Anyway, you don't have to deal with these nits now if you don't want to, since the issues pre-exist this PR

I ended up rewriting most of the Annotated section so I consider any additional clarity issues to be in scope.

Reviewer 2: > How is this new wording?

Much improved, thanks!

Python values that represent associated *metadata*::

    from typing import Annotated

    Annotated[BaseExpr, Metadata1, Metadata2, ...]

Here are the specific details of the syntax:

* The base expression (the first argument to ``Annotated``) must be valid
  in the context where it is being used:

    * If ``Annotated`` is used in a place where arbitrary
      :term:`annotation expressions <annotation expression>` are allowed,

>       the base expression may also be an annotation expression

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      the base expression may be an annotation expression.
```

    * Otherwise, the base expression must be a valid :term:`type expression`.

* Multiple metadata elements are supported (``Annotated`` supports variadic
  arguments)::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")]

* There must be at least one metadata element (``Annotated[int]`` is not valid)

* The order of the metadata is preserved and matters for equality
  checks::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")] != Annotated[
        int, ctype("char"), ValueRange(3, 10)
    ]

* Nested ``Annotated`` types are flattened, with metadata ordered

>   starting with the innermost::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  starting with the innermost ``Annotated`` expression::
```

    Annotated[Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10)], ctype("char")] == Annotated[
        int, ValueRange(3, 10), ctype("char")
    ]

* Duplicated metadata elements are not removed::

    Annotated[int, ValueRange(3, 10)] != Annotated[
        int, ValueRange(3, 10), ValueRange(3, 10)
    ]

> * ``Annotated`` can be used with nested and generic aliases, but only if it

Reviewer: Perhaps this should clarify "...in the definition of nested and generic type aliases...". 

After all, it can be use "with aliases" (i.e. type aliases can be used within the base expression) even if the base expression is not a type expression. For example:

```python
class Foo[T](TypedDict):
    x: Annotated[Required[MyTypeAlias[T]], 1]
```

>   wraps a type expression::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  wraps a :term:`type expression`::
```

:pep:`593` and an earlier version of this specification used the term
"annotations" instead of "metadata" for the extra arguments to
``Annotated``. The term "annotations" is deprecated to avoid confusion
with the parameter, return, and variable annotations that are part of
the Python syntax.

Consuming metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ultimately, the responsibility of how to interpret the metadata (if
at all) is the responsibility of the tool or library encountering the
``Annotated`` type. A tool or library encountering an ``Annotated`` type
can scan through the metadata to determine if they are of interest
(e.g., using ``isinstance()``).

**Unknown metadata:** When a tool or a library does not support
metadata or encounters an unknown metadata object it should ignore it
and treat the annotated type as the base type. For example, when encountering
a metadata object that is not an instance of ``struct2.ctype`` in the metadata
for a name (e.g., ``Annotated[str, 'foo', struct2.ctype("<10s")]``), the
``struct2`` unpack method should ignore it.

**Namespacing metadata:** Namespaces are not needed for metadata since
the class used by the metadata object acts as a namespace.

> **Multiple metadata object:** It's up to the tool consuming the metadata

Reviewer: object -> objects

Author: ```suggestion
**Multiple metadata objects:** It's up to the tool consuming the metadata
```

    SmallInt = Annotated[int, ValueRange(0, 100)]
    SmallInt(1)  # Type error

:pep:`593` and an earlier version of this specification used the term
"annotations" instead of "metadata" for the extra arguments to
``Annotated``. The term "annotations" is deprecated to avoid confusion
with the parameter, return, and variable annotations that are part of
the Python syntax.

Meaning
^^^^^^^

The metadata provided by ``Annotated`` can be used for either static
analysis or at runtime. If a library (or tool) encounters an instance of
``Annotated[T, x]`` and has no special logic for metadata ``x``, it

> should ignore it and simply treat the type as ``T``. Thus, in general,

Reviewer 4: Nit, just to clarify that T may not be precisely a type (i.e. a type expression): 
```suggestion
should ignore it and simply treat the annotation as ``T``. Thus, in general,
```

any :term:`type expression` or :term:`annotation expression` may be
wrapped in ``Annotated`` without changing its meaning. However, type
checkers may choose to recognize particular metadata objects and use
them to implement extensions to the standard type system.

> ``Annotated`` metadata may apply either to the type or to the symbol

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``Annotated`` metadata may apply either to the base expression or to the symbol
```

being annotated, or even to some other aspect of the program.

Consuming metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ultimately, the responsibility of how to interpret the metadata (if
at all) is the responsibility of the tool or library encountering the
``Annotated`` type. A tool or library encountering an ``Annotated`` type
can scan through the metadata to determine if they are of interest
(e.g., using ``isinstance()``).

**Unknown metadata:** When a tool or a library does not support

> metadata or encounters an unknown metadata object it should ignore it
> and treat the annotated type as the base type. For example, when encountering

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
metadata or encounters an unknown metadata object it should ignore it
and treat the annotation as the base expression. For example, when encountering
```

a metadata object that is not an instance of ``struct2.ctype`` in the metadata
for a name (e.g., ``Annotated[str, 'foo', struct2.ctype("<10s")]``), the
``struct2`` unpack method should ignore it.

**Namespacing metadata:** Namespaces are not needed for metadata since

> the class used by the metadata object acts as a namespace.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the class of the metadata object acts as a namespace.
```

**Multiple metadata objects:** It's up to the tool consuming the metadata
to decide whether the client is allowed to have several metadata objects on

> one type and how to merge those objects.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
one annotation and how to merge those objects.
```

Since the ``Annotated`` type allows you to put several metadata objects of

> the same (or different) type(s) on any type, the tools or libraries

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the same (or different) type(s) on any annotation, the tools or libraries
```

    SmallInt = Annotated[int, ValueRange(0, 100)]
    SmallInt(1)  # Type error

:pep:`593` and an earlier version of this specification used the term
"annotations" instead of "metadata" for the extra arguments to
``Annotated``. The term "annotations" is deprecated to avoid confusion
with the parameter, return, and variable annotations that are part of
the Python syntax.

Meaning
^^^^^^^

The metadata provided by ``Annotated`` can be used for either static

> analysis or at runtime. If a library (or tool) encounters an instance of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or runtime analysis. If a library (or tool) encounters an instance of
```

``Annotated[T, x]`` and has no special logic for metadata element ``x``, it
should ignore it and treat the expression as equivalent to ``T``. Thus, in general,
any :term:`type expression` or :term:`annotation expression` may be

> wrapped in ``Annotated`` without changing its meaning. However, type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wrapped in ``Annotated`` without changing the meaning of the
wrapped expression. However, type
```

> checkers may choose to recognize particular metadata elements and use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
checkers may additionally choose to recognize particular metadata elements and use
```

    SmallInt = Annotated[int, ValueRange(0, 100)]
    SmallInt(1)  # Type error

:pep:`593` and an earlier version of this specification used the term
"annotations" instead of "metadata" for the extra arguments to

> ``Annotated``. The term "annotations" is deprecated to avoid confusion

Reviewer: I find it a bit odd to say that the "term is deprecated". The typing spec is the source of truth here, so is it necessary to clarify that it deviates in terminology from the PEP or from earlier versions of the spec? We don't do this elsewhere in the spec where we have clarified or updated terminology.

Author: I think it's helpful in cases where another term was previously in use. I'm not sure there is any comparable situation elsewhere in the spec.

with the parameter, return, and variable annotations that are part of
the Python syntax.

Meaning
^^^^^^^

The metadata provided by ``Annotated`` can be used for either static
or runtime analysis. If a library (or tool) encounters an instance of
``Annotated[T, x]`` and has no special logic for metadata element ``x``, it
should ignore it and treat the expression as equivalent to ``T``. Thus, in general,
any :term:`type expression` or :term:`annotation expression` may be
wrapped in ``Annotated`` without changing the meaning of the
wrapped expression. However, type
checkers may additionally choose to recognize particular metadata elements and use
them to implement extensions to the standard type system.

``Annotated`` metadata may apply either to the base expression or to the symbol
being annotated, or even to some other aspect of the program.

Consuming metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Ultimately, the responsibility of how to interpret the metadata (if

Reviewer 4: pre-existing wording nit: redundant and awkward "responsibility of" here:
```suggestion
Ultimately, how to interpret the metadata (if
```

Author: That reads awkward to me too, how about:
```suggestion
Ultimately, deciding how to interpret the metadata (if
```

Reviewer 4: Sure, that's fine.

at all) is the responsibility of the tool or library encountering the
``Annotated`` type. A tool or library encountering an ``Annotated`` type
can scan through the metadata to determine if they are of interest
(e.g., using ``isinstance()``).

**Unknown metadata:** When a tool or a library does not support
metadata or encounters an unknown metadata element, it should ignore it
and treat the annotation as the base expression. For example, when encountering

> a metadata object that is not an instance of ``struct2.ctype`` in the metadata

Reviewer: I find this example (including its wording) really confusing, but that's probably because it requires knowledge of `struct2`. Since this was in the previous version of the spec, it's probably fine to leave it, but maybe we can clean it up in a subsequent round of changes.

Author: I'll just delete the example; I feel the text of the section is clear enough without it.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Writing ``typing.Annotated`` everywhere can be quite verbose;

> fortunately, the ability to alias types means that in practice we

Reviewer 4: I actually think this is a place where the previous wording was preferable; "annotation" here was not being used to refer to a metadata object.

Author: There is no ability to alias annotations, though, only to alias types. For example, this is illegal:

```
FinalInt = Final[int]
x: FinalInt = 1
```
